Volvo Car Corporation (stylized as VOLVO) is a Swedish luxury vehicle
manufacturer established in 1927 and headquartered in Gothenburg,
Sweden, where it operates out of the VAK building.

**<u>VOLVO & Ford Relation – The American Way</u>**

Volvo Car Corporation was part of Ford Motor Company's Premier
Automotive Group (PAG), along with Jaguar, Aston Martin and Land Rover.
Ford decided to restructure plans for Volvo Cars, pushing it further
upmarket alongside the lower end of Mercedes and BMW sedans, wagons, and
SUV crossovers. The outcome was the luxurious second generation Volvo
S80 and the new small premium crossover Volvo XC60. When the global
economic crisis of 2008 threatened the US automakers, Swedish
authorities became concerned about the fate of Volvo if Ford would file
for bankruptcy. These concerns mounted after repeated mass-layoffs at
Volvo.

Ford Motor Company offered Volvo Cars for sale in December 2008, after
suffering losses that year. On 28 October 2009, Ford confirmed that,
after considering several offers, the preferred buyer of Volvo Cars was
Zhejiang Geely Holding Group, the parent of Chinese motor manufacturer
Geely Automobile.

Today's cars may not look like Henry Ford's Model T, but most are still
made pretty much according to the assembly line mass-production formula
that he pioneered at the start of the century. Building on concepts it
pioneered at its 13-year-old plant, Sweden's A. B. Volvo is now intent
upon entirely jettisoning Ford's assembly line approach at a \$315
million plant it is constructing at Uddevalla on the west coast of the
Swedish peninsula. The plant will be organized into work teams - each of
which will ultimately assemble a complete car by itself.

At its Kalmar facility on Sweden's east coast, Volvo has for a long time
been pulling away from assembly line manufacturing, in which one worker
does the same single task over and over again.

The cars being assembled here are ferried around the plant by separate
computer-controlled carriers. Work teams of about 20 people are
responsible for putting together entire units of the car, such as the
electrical system and the engine. In this batch-work system, each worker
typically does a series of tasks.

Thus VOLVO took over the assembly line mode of production from Ford. The
best guide to Volvo's car-making future is the two-story Kalmar plant,
whose hexagonal cellular configuration makes it resemble, from above, a
giant honeycomb. Today Kalmar is a success story and a continuing source
of innovative techniques that have been copied both by other Volvo
plants and other auto makers, including the General Motors Corporation.

**<u>The Japanese Attempt</u>**

Volvo is synonymous with vehicle safety for many, having introduced
numerous world firsts including the three-point safety belt, blind spot
warning and pedestrian detection systems.

Volvo Cars’ dedication to safety dates back to the company’s start in
1.    At that time, the following directive was given to the engineering
team by the founders: “Cars are driven by people. Therefore, the guiding
principle behind everything we make at Volvo is – and must remain –
safety.” This human-centric approach to cars continues beyond just
safety and is core to Volvo’s entire design process.

An approach known as the Andon system, pioneered by the Japanese Car
manufacturing companies like Toyota, is used to ensure quality
throughout the production process. The aim of the system is to simplify
the production process and make it easier to overview for the people
working on the assembly line. One aspect of Andon is that every employee
can sound the alert by pulling a yellow cord if a problem arises. A team
board shows each day’s target achievement and quality level, so as to
identify any possible areas of improvement.

Volvo did join with Japanese firm Mitsubishi with aim of producing
competitive automobile. Mitsubishi, founded in 1873, entered into this
arrangement because it wanted to obtain its first manufacturing facility
in Europe and to do it rather cheaply. The Japanese also wanted to know
how Volvo built its high quality and safe cars. Mitsubishi estimated
that Volvo had to cut down its labor force by 20% to in order to attain
leaner production. Volvo had might have to shifty its factories and
foundries to third part, shifting 1300 employees in process. In learning
the Mitsubishi, Volvo employees also were challenged by learning problem
from communicating in Swedish & Dutch and then switching to common
language English.

Volvo’s workers had difficulty in understanding the Japanese
interpretation of accessible quality levels and quality “circles”. Volvo
also attempted to induce its labor force to participate in decision
making from the early design stage to the final manufacturing phase. The
project backfired. Instead of energizing employees to perform more
effectively, it actually made workers uncertain of their role in
production process. In other words, workers and managers at Volvo found
it hard to adopt Japanese techniques.

**<u>Conclusion</u>**

American and Japanese company had lot to give to Volvo, be it the
assembly system, The quality system, etc. Still Swedish car maker VOLVO
didn’t last long on these theories. Volvo announced the closing-down of
its innovative plants in Kalmar and Uddevalla. These plants have become
world-wide symbols of the possibility of combining high productivity and
rewarding jobs. These plants had the best of the American & the Japanese
way, but couldn’t sustain owning to pressure and human-centric core on
which Volvo stood. Continues dominance of traditional assembly lines and
the innovative Japanese automobile production systems affected Volvo’s
performance.

Volvo puts the utmost emphasis on customer satisfaction, on safety and
on protecting the environment and its resources. Volvo is the
human-centric brand. Its cars are “Designed around You!” with the
customer being the focus of all its activities.
